Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Will Starr. He's an author and journalist.
And today we're talking about his book, The Status
Game on Human Life and how to play it.
So will welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, it's great to be on. Thank you, God.
Thanks for asking me.
So, my first question, could you tell us perhaps
about the premise of the book and also a
little bit about some of the story behind it?
I mean, what led you to writing this book?
Yeah, sure. So the, the, the, the premise of
the status game is to um to put the,
the, the pu of status um is a fundamental
part of the human condition. Um Status is a,
is a, is a need, like humans need it.
It's not like a nice thing to have, it's
a need. And so if you accept this premise,
um then status manifests all over the place in
human culture, in human society and human behavior. And
so what I wanted to do with the Status
Game was to try and reveal the places where
status is this often invisible force, changing ourselves, changing,
how we feel about life, changing, history, changing society,
changing social media, anywhere I could find it, I
wanted to kind of expose it to, to give
this kind of broad picture of life as a
status game.
Yeah, and we're going to talk about some of
the things you mentioned there, but perhaps what is
status because I mean, maybe some people don't know
exactly what you would be talking about when you
mentioned the word like status or what is it?
Yeah, so, so, so, so people get upset about
status for reasons which I'm sure we'll get into
for, for some good evolutionary reasons. Um But, but,
but culturally we, when we think of status, we
think of things like Kim Kardashian or um you
know, Donald Trump or YYYY, you know, reality TV
P pe people who are desperate for attention, desperate
for, to show off people who are interested in
status are kind of shallow and um uh kind
of vulgar. Um And, and that's wrong. Um That,
that's not what status is, sta status is, is
the, is simply the, the sense that we are
valued by the people around us, you know, separate
from love and belongings and connections, a separate thing.
It's, you're valued, you're respected. So, so, so that's,
that's all that status is, you know, it's a
universal human need that people feel valued and respected.
That's why it's a universal human reality that people
don't like being insulted. If I call you a
dick, it's gonna annoy you. That's because you, you,
you're interested in, in, in your, in your status
and you value your status.
Yeah. And so there are different ways of uh
manifesting status of acquiring status and in different contexts,
perhaps, uh it would manifest in different ways.
Right? That's, that's right. I mean, the, the, you
know, for the, for the, for the kind of
more simple organisms on earth, like a, like a,
like a hen hens will peck at each other
until the pecking order is established. And that's the
hen, that's the hen status game. It's as simple
as that, like who's the best pecker but, but,
but humans are just extraordinarily imaginative creatures. We live
in this sort of fantastic kind of story world.
A a and, and, and, you know, one of
the ways that you could argue that humans are
separate from the rest of the animals and we've
been, we've, we've allowed ourselves to sort of take,
we've been able to take over the world is
because we have this al almost infinite ways of
playing status games. You know, you could be a,
you could be a chef in a kitchen and
YYYY you, there are, there are, there are myriad
ways you could, you could unstate us. You know
how, how, how, how, how clean your station is,
how delicious your food is your reviews on various
websites, how long hours you work? You know, it
just goes on and on and on and on
and on. And, and the way that humans tend
to be is the things that we're particularly good
at are the things that we value and the
things that we think. Yeah, I'm great because of
X and Y, you know, not Y
yeah. And I mean, you can have status because
you're a famous person or because you did something
that people consider very important in your society or
you can have status across different professional occupations, you
can have status because you're a very uh an
extremely kind person and stuff like that.
That's right. So, so, so, so, so broadly speaking,
there are three thr I mean, there are loads
of status gains but there, there are things like
age um in, in some contexts in, in, in
human cultures, age is, you know, being older is
higher status. So in Britain, if I'm sure in
most countries if, if you wanna get a seat
on the train and you're a, you're, you're, you're
an old person, they, they let you have the
seat at least in theory you've got the status.
But if you're on the beach in, in, in
Bondi Beach in Sydney, being old is not high,
it is low status, it's the young hotties that
are high status. So it's so things like age
are, are really important. Beauty is obviously really important.
Um, BUT, but, but they're not that interesting. I
mean, ii, I think that, you know, for me,
there are sort of three big kinds of status
game. The, the, the first one is dominance and
we've been, you know, we've been, we've been playing
dominance games since before. We were a human animals
primarily play dominance games. It's, it's not just about,
um, physical aggression, it's about the threat of physical
aggression. And that's, you know, that, that, that, that's
most dominance games even in the animal kingdom, you
know, the actual violence is a last resort for
most animals. It's the threat of the violence that,
that, that, that how most status games manifest and
that's the same as in humans. But, but uh
but also in humans, we have social, you know,
what you might call social violence or the threat
of ostracization, reputation destruction, all that good stuff we
see on social media. Um So, so, so that's
dominance and then, and then there are also these
games that we play with reputation um with ID,
with our identity um as virtue games. Um So,
so humans compete to be seen as the most
virtuous. So that's not, you know, it's things like
self selflessness and generosity and um but, but, but
it's also things like um courage in battle. So,
so, so a courageous warrior will be seen as
virtuous. Uh uh BUT it's also, and it's also
things like um people who know the rules of
your group and enforce the rules of your group.
So, so, you know, the witch finder plays a
virtue game. So, so virtue games can quickly become
incredibly dark and violent and horren horrendous as, as
paradoxical as that might seem at first view. And
then of course, there's competence games, success games. Uh
WE, we compete to be, to be who can
be the best at uh whatever endeavors we're pursuing.
Uh uh And, and I, and I, and I
really feel that, you know, competence games, success games
are the, are the best games to play if
you want, they, they, they're actually much better than
virtue games. If you want to make the world
a better place, it, it, it's much better to,
to discover a new vaccine than it is to
be the Pope in my estimation.
Yeah. Uh BUT uh I mean status and the
acquisition of status doesn't always involve necessarily competition, right?
Because when people think about status, they would probably
think immediately about the hierarchy and people competing among
themselves to acquire status. But uh we, you can
acquire status at least in particular contexts through cooper
operation,
right? Well, you have to co-operate in order to
create a status game. You know, it's a e
every human group is a status game. So, so,
so, so it's a manifestation of cooper operation. Um
YOU know, a a set of humans gets together
and they, they they, they agree rules by which
to play a status game. And that's why it's
a game. It's like monopoly. We agree that these
are the rules and we play by the rules
and whoever does the best at monopoly is the
winner and it's the same in the games of
life. So, so you can't separate out Cooper operation
from s from status games because, because they, they
wouldn't be functional otherwise AAA. And in fact, you
know, status games is kind of how it is,
how we cooper there has to be a hierarchy
uh I in, in a functional Cooper group and
it has to be somebody ideally super competent and
hopefully a bit virtuous at the top who's go,
who's gonna lead us. So, so, so, so, so,
you know, sta status games are the way that
we figure out how we're going to cooper, you
know, how, how this group is gonna gonna act
in its highly coordinate way to get what it
wants.
Mhm But, but, but I mean, perhaps what I
was trying to allude to is that at least
in particular contexts you can acquire status through being
prosocial, right? You don't necessarily have always to be
uh competitive in a conflict kind of way, let's
say,
yeah, it is, it's not necessarily a conflict thing.
Um Prosocial is moral and moral games are, you
know, they're virtue games. So, so, so um yeah,
YYYY, you know, people compete to, to www when
you go into just giving, uh a and you,
uh, put your donation with your name next to
it, you always look to see how much is
my donation compared to the norm here. You know,
and you feel good if it's above, you know,
so, so, so, yeah, you know, we, we, we,
we, we, we, we compete to have the most
prosocial reputation and that's a good thing, you know,
that I think people, when I talk about this,
people sometimes feel like you're kind of shitting on
the human condition and, and, and you're, you're, you're
saying altruism, uh, YYYY, you know, is a, is
a con but it, but, but it isn't a
con, you know, it's, it's, uh, the fact that
we've competed to achieve a prosocial reputation. We've, we've
competed to have the reputation as the most cooper
person. It, it is probably the best part of
the human condition. It's amazing. It means that when
we do good for other people, we feel good,
we feel we have a bumping status in our
own minds and we, and other people hopefully also
treat us like, oh, that's a really good thing.
Uh, THAT, that, that, that you've done and you
feel good. You have, you feel good in that
moment and that's, that, that, that's a fantastic part
of the human condition.
Uh But I mean, do you believe in, let's
say genuine altruism in the sense that someone is
really actually genuinely interested in helping other people because
in this case, since it is also part of
the status game, someone might think that maybe even
if you are altruistic that it's sort of a
self-interest thing for you to do because you're acquiring,
uh, status through it.
Yeah. But, well, um, nnn nothing comes from a
void. I mean, there, there's a reason for everything,
for every human behavior. There's a reason and for
kind of in the invertical was altruism. There's a
reason for that too. And the reason is that
we've evolved to, we, we, we, we're highly cooper
a, we, we've evolved to exist in these highly
collaborative groups and that, and that's why we're so
successful. We, we, you know, rather than um indi
individual, you know, e even chimpanzees are very close
relatives go, you know, they, they source their food
as individuals whereas humans go as groups. And so
a part of that is, is that we are
wired to feel good when we are of assistance
to other people. And the uh you know, that's
altruism. But the, but the reason that we have,
we, we have, we are have evolved to feel
good about that is because it's good for our
reputation and when we have a reputation for helping
other people, other people will then help us, we're
raising status. So, you know, there's a reason why
we, some why, why, why, why we, why we
engage in altruistic acts. That's not, that's not to
say that Altruism is a conner, as I said.
But, but, but the, but the idea that Altruism
comes out of a void that it's this kind
of God given thing that people are kind of
altruistic from this place with no roots in anything.
It just comes from the heavens. There is this
magical, wonderful thing. I think it's very naive,
right? So, uh tell us then about your evolutionary
approach to status, I mean, uh uh what would
be your evolutionary account of it? And how old
do you think status is in evolutionary history?
Well, you know, most animals compete for status. That,
that, that, that's, that's how it works. So we've
been competing for status since before we were human
since we were up in the trees. It usually
in these kind of dominance ways. Uh But then
when we started living in groups around campfires, we
had to find a new way to compete the
status because you can't do dominance all the time
because it really would be like hell, you know,
you get mostly men beating each other, like beating
each other up constantly. You know, it, it, it's,
it's a nightmare. So in order to become to,
to, to live in communities, we had to evolve
nonviolent ways by which we could compete with status.
And so, so you do that with reputation. And
so somewhere between 100,000 and um sort of 50,000
and 100,000 years ago, we started, um you know,
kind of living life as animals that experience our
lives in the form of a story. Uh We're
characters in a story. We have this identity, this
reputation, this kind of version of self, which is
an act of imagination and communal imagination. There's you
that exist in, in, in flesh and blood and
there's the you that exists in your own mind
and in the mind of the people that, that,
that are around you and, and, and, and that
identity that we have is incredibly important to humans.
People will die for their, to, to in defense
of their identity, they will give up their actual
physical lives in defense of their identity. So we
play status games with that identity. That's what we
started to do. And, and as I said before,
there, you know, there are two principal ways, there's
virtue and there's success and the reason that, that,
that, that, that, that, that we have evolved to
compete for, to be virtuous, have a reputation of
being virtuous and have a, have a reputation of
being successful is because both of those things benefit
the cooper group. So, so, so when we compete
to have this prosocial, selfless altruistic reputation, that's great
for the group cos what that means is that
we're being selfless, we're putting the group's interests before
our own. So, so, so, so of course, that,
that, you know, ee evolution wants us to think
like that, it wants us to play those games
because the more we play those games the, that
if everybody gives to the group, primarily the group
is really successful. It, uh, and so, so, so,
so that, of course, is something that, that, that
evolution is gonna wanna favor because it makes for
more functional groups. And the same is obviously to,
with competence in, in a hunter gatherer group being
the best honey Finder being the best, um, sorcerer
being the best hunter being the best tuber digger
outer. That's great. You know, beca because you're, you're,
you're bringing your talent to, to, for the benefit
of the group. You, you're calories, you're bringing yy,
you know, I don't know, great shelters and you're
teaching other people these things that you're, you're figuring
out. So that's the other thing that, that, that,
that evolution wants us to compete for. So, you
know, to be good and to be excellent. I
mean, I, I, it, that, that, that's how humans
have become so successful. Cos we compete to be
good and we compete to be excellent.
Mhm. Uh And so I would imagine that there
would also be a very big, at least in
humans cultural element to how we play these status
games, right? Because I mean, whatever kind of identity
or social identity you have for, if you are
a shaman or if you are a hunter or
if you are someone like that, uh, that, that
is a culturally constructed identity.
That's right. So, so, so, so there, there are
kind of basic rule that are universal for human
groups is like seven. Um AND um things like
defer to your superiors, protect, protect property rights, the,
the, the, the these are kind of, you know,
in our baked into our DNA, every human is
born and these emerge the, the, the, the, these
basic ways of existing in a Cooper group. But
they, they, they leave huge um um uh capacity
for culture to go on top of them to,
you know, so it's culture is kind of the
software of, you know, o of the oo of
the human mind and, and the DNA is the
hardware. So, so, so of course, there's massive cultural
differences, you know, when you go around the world,
there's massive cultural differences. Um YOU know, when you
go to China, you see lots of people spitting
in the street. If you go to Japan, even
blowing your nose is seen as disgusting. Whereas in
the West, we blow our nose, you know, so
it's so it's so even little things like that.
But, but, but there's huge cultural differences as, as
you go around the world, you know, there's, there's
hu huge cultural differences as you, as you, as
you move around in time as well. You know,
there are, there are some tribes um I, I
think I wrote about them in my previous book,
the science of storytelling. Um WHERE um it, it,
it's the norm that on, on, on a wedding
night that the men of the village queue up
to have sex with your bride that's seen as
normal, you know, like things that we would find
horrific, you know, in different countries around Europe, there's
the different ages of consent. So, so, so you'll
be a, you'll be a pedophile in one country
but a normal person in another country, you know,
that's happening right now in Europe, you know, amongst
neighbors. So, so, so there are huge um cultural
differences. Um And of course, the brain fools us
into thinking the norms of our particular status game
are correct and, and, and you know, and if
you break those norms, that's, that's you get a
reduction in status. If you adhere to the norms,
you, you get AAA rag in status.
Mhm. And are there important sex or gender differences
between men and women in, in terms of how
they compete for a status?
Well, I I think one of the most interesting
ones um that I wish that our culture in
general you were more familiar with was the differences
in interests. And, and I, I think probably lots
of your viewers will be well aware of this,
but one of the most well established universal gender
differences is between interest in things and interest in
people. So women in general tend to be more
interested in people, men in general tend to be
more interested in things, which is why, you know,
there was a big kerfuffle, um maybe 1010 or
more years ago. Now at Google, when, when it,
when I think it was revealed that 20% only
20% of their code is a female. And um
there was some poor guy that tried to establish
a scientific well, did establish it. He said this
is, well, this is what you'd expect partly, you
know, in large part because of the men are
more interested in engineering and, and how things work
and women or women are not. So this is
what you'd expect. And he was kind of fired
from his job and sort of pilloried of being
a sort of misogynist for pointing out this very
well established. Um And really non-controversial should be non-controversial
idea. So what that means is that is, is
that when you go into companies like Google uh
or YYYY, you know, you are likely to find
a big gender difference and it's not because of
sexism or misogyny on the part of the company.
It's just because, you know, it's just like when
you go to a school, most of the teachers
are gonna be female. Um It's, it, it's just
uh the manifestation of a gender difference. Um The,
the, the there are also other differences I I
believe and um I haven't seen a lot of
scientific evidence, but just life experience makes me uh
this is just a suspicion of mine, I feel
that that women and men compete for status, generally
speaking in different ways, in the sense that women
are, are more communal naturally, women tend to do
things in groups much more easily. Um And men
tend to, men tend to kind of play status
games as individuals, as compete as individuals. Um Sometimes
you hear it said that women socialize side by
side and men socialize face to face. Um Yy,
you know, um AAA and I, and I think
that's II, I think that's really interesting and I
think you see that manifesting in, in, in aggression,
in dominance games, you know, men tend to be
much more straightforward than individual and they'll, they'll take
it to your face if there's a problem with
you. Whereas women, female aggression tends to be much
more communal. It's about reputation destruction, it's about the,
the gang, you know, forming uh and the, and
the sense of consensus forming and rounding on the,
on the, on the poor victim. So, so II,
I think a lot of the, the cancel culture,
the the kind of reputation destruction stuff that you
see in the, in the modern, in, in the
modern world. It, it, it feel, I mean, obviously,
obviously I'm not saying that men don't do this.
Of course, men do this too, but it, but
it, but it feels much more female typical. It's,
you know, if there's toxic masculinity there's also toxic
femininity. And I think a lot of that council
culture stuff is a manifestation of toxic femininity.
Yeah, that, that's very interesting. And of course, we
have to keep in mind that these are average
differences and it's not that women compete only one
way and men compete the other way. But I
would imagine that another somewhat big difference would be
that men, when they compete against one another, they
would resort to violence much more often than women.
Absolutely. There's the violence and there's also the threat
of violence, which again is the same with animals.
It is the threat that usually does the job.
Um, SO ss so, yeah, that, that, yeah, II,
I think that's it, it's, it's the dominance games
where I think that, that the gender differences most
likely play out and, and, and, and again, that
that will go back, um, a long, long time
in our evolutionary history, you know, women have been
the, the primary caregivers, um, and men have been
the kind of go out and hunt us, um,
primarily for millions of years. So, so, so that,
so that's got to have some effect on our,
you know, if I in our present ways of
thinking and being,
yeah. And, and what are the psychological effects of
being low status? I mean, psychologically, what do people
who are low status experience?
Well, I, the, the, the, one of the important
things to kind of know about the status game.
Kind of the idea that I, that I thrash
out in the book is that life isn't just
one big status game. Human life is almost infinite
status games. So it's not like that you've got
Elon Musk and Taylor Swift at the top and
some, you know, itinerant peanut seller in y you
know, the I I in the developing world at
the bottom and he's happy and she's happy and
they're miserable. That's not how it is at all.
We we, we tend to compete with status with,
with those closest to us. So the peanut seller
doesn't care about Elon Musk and E, Elon Musk
clearly doesn't care about the peanut seller. They're not
competing with each other. Um Elon Musk is competing
with Jeff Bezos and people like this and Taylor
Swift is competing with Charlie XCX and people like
that. So everybody's playing this very difficult game. So,
so, so, so, so, so, so we all play
these kind of mostly local games with the, with
the people around us. We're not all competing with
the whole world isn't competing with each other. Um
That was my caveat, but I've forgotten the question.
What was the uh
basically, what would be the psychological effect of being
low
students? OK. So, so, so, so, so, so, so
even people living what we might, you know, a
very low socio, economic deprived life might not feel
low status if they are relatively high status in
their communities. That that's the first thing. Um But,
but, but if you do feel like you are
chronically suffering from low status is extremely bad for
your, for your mental health because your subconscious is
telling you something's going wrong like in, in the
tribes in which we evolved. Um EARNING status, earning
the reputation of being a valuable member of the
tribe would have got you more food, better food,
safer sleeping sites. Um BETTER conditions of life for
your Children, better access to your choice of mates.
Basically, everything in your life gets better when your
status goes up. And it's always been that way.
It's that way today. So when you feel chronically
low status, your, your, your brain, your subconscious brain
treats that as a matter of deep alarm and
we become extremely distressed. We become um depressed, anxious.
Um We, we often become suicidal. Um You, you
know, sss, you know, a sudden, a sudden um
loss of status or an episode of intense humiliation,
humiliation being the public and sudden withdrawal of status.
Significant resource of status is, is, is, is associated
with um high rates of suicide. So, so it's
extremely um bad for us. And I mean, in
my spare time, I volunteer for um uh the
Samaritans which is a British crisis hotline. So I
speak often to people who are suicidal and the
most um common reason why people are suicidal. They
mean they are people who suffer from chronic pain.
People who are recently bereaved. But, but the most
common one is either people chronic, lacking in status,
they go, I'm a failure. I'm useless. I've let
everyone down. It's that kind of talk or they're
chronic lacking in connection. No one loves me. You
know, I don't, I, I'm lonely. That's the other
one that's just, you know, connection is just as
important as, as, as status in its way. Um,
So, so, so yeah, it's, it's extremely bad for
us to, to feel like we're low status.
Mhm You mentioned loneliness there. So I would imagine
that something like social rejection could also be a
consequence of being low status, right?
Yeah, I mean, you can't disentangle those two things
completely becau because they're both kind of manifestations of
human tribal life. We want to be connected and
respected. We want to be securely fastened into our
group, but also valued by that group. Um uh
But, but, but connection, belongingness is a separate thing
from um status. You know, sometimes scientists, neuroscientists talk
about, we have a soomer in our subconscious which
monitors the, the health of our social life, but
there's also a higher meer that monitors our place
in the hierarchy. Um So connection is obviously isn't
the subject of the status game, but it, but
it is equally important to status. Like we, we,
it's not just that we have to feel valued,
we have to feel loved, we have to feel
securely attached to people who care about us. That's,
that's, that's no less important than feeling valued.
So, but we're talking here mostly about the losers,
let's say. But what about the winners? Someone with
high status and wants to maintain it, don't they
usually also go through stress?
Yeah, of course. I mean, and, and, and that's
for the reason I was talking about before where
we all play these local status games. I mean,
that, that's the kind of evil kind of qualitative
status really. It's like, it's like a drug, it's
like a heroin. It's, you're never gonna, you're, you're,
it kind of robs us of the ability to
be permanently happy status because no matter what we
get, we always want more. Um THAT, that's kind
of how we're set up and it kind of
ratchets up. It's not like, I mean, of course,
you get, you get a, a AAA few insanely
ambitious young people that dream of being Elon Musk
or Taylor Swift. Um But most people don't, they
just want the next thing and the next thing
and the next thing, but the thing about human
brains is we acclimatized to the next thing. So
every little achievement we have, we think. Yeah, great.
I've achieved this, I've made this and then two
minutes later you want the next thing and the
next thing and the next thing and the next
thing. And so so, so even people at the
very top of the, of the status game, you
know, the masks and the swiss of this world,
they're not happy about their status because they, well,
partly because, um, they're the targets of immense amounts
of, um, resentment and, and envy. I mean, Elon
Musk, um, and Taylor Swift are both two of
the most famous people in the western world, but
there are also two of the most hated people
in the western world. They've got lots of people
that, that despise them, you know. Um So that
can't be very nice. But, but, but even aside
from that, the, the their, their place at the
top, it's never permanent. They're all, you're always replaced,
you always have um competition and for, and for
me and mortals like us, I mean, you know,
your competition is podcasters. My competition is other Midle
authors. I mean, you know, ok, sometimes you feel
that, but, but God imagine if your competition was
Jeff Bezos, you know, like, like, or, or whoever
or whoever it is in Elon Musk's world, these
unbelievably driven, smart, um ruthless individuals are, are, are,
are constantly coming for you. And I mean, that's,
that's not a recipe for happiness but any stretch
of the imagination,
right? So tell us then about how status games
play out on social media because that's something that
you alluded to earlier.
Yeah. So, um in the book and also in
the book Selfie, which I wrote a few years
ago about a, which was about, you know, a
lot of that was about the, the, the, the,
the effect of the internet on our western culture.
Um I write a lot about the, um the
very naive utopian vision that people had for the
internet back in the nineties, you know, the Wired
Magazine people and, you know, the people that could
see the internet coming, they, they all believed that
um once um billions and mi millions and billions
were all kind of all wired together that the
hierarchies of the past would collapse. And we'd be,
it would bring us into this utopia and future
where nobody would compete and everybody would be happy.
Um But of course, that's not what happens when
you connect the human beings together, when you connect
human beings together, they're just gonna play status games.
That's just what they do. I mean, it really
is and, and in the status game I am
there, there's a, there's a, there's a bit about
this very early social media website called the Well,
as far as I could find, it's the, probably
the, it's arguably the first proper social media site
because it's, you know, you had to, it was
in the, it was in the mid eighties. So
you had the phones where you put the phone
in the modem. Um And there was a AAA
and um and it was like Reddit. So, so
you'd have these um little sub, you could set
up any kind of subject group and sort of
show off about your, about your particular um area
of nerdy interest. Um And then even when there
was as small as 500 users of the world,
they started having what they called flame wars people,
they, they would just have massive arguments. Um They,
they, they, they had a whole drama which I
recount briefly in the status game about um pronouns
for trans people. You know, like it's unbelievably um
uh uh reminiscent of uh of online drama today
when it's not 500 people that are connected together,
it's more than half the population of the planet.
So, so, so, so, so that's what we do
when we, you know, we, we, when we connect
people together, we compete, uh you know, when we
play status games. Um Unfortunately, and that, that's what
a lot of what social media is today is.
People, you know, like talked about dominance games, virtual
games and success games. Well, that's social media. We,
we play dominance games, we push each other around.
Um We judge each other for not following our
particular social norms. So, you know, the woks and
the anti woke constantly go after each other for
not for not seeing the world exactly as they
do. Um You've got um virtue games, people showing
off about the wonderful things they do for charity
and um uh and so on and then of
course, you've got success games people showing off about
this amazing holiday. They've got this achievement they've made
linkedin is, is, is, is mostly, you know, showing
off about success games. So, so, so, so that's,
that's really the, the kind of bread and butter
of social media and it's what makes social media
addictive. Yy, you know, that's why it's so compulsive.
There has to be something about social media, um
which explains its universal success. As I say, more
than half the population of the world is on
social media, which is amazing considering that that includes
Children, people who haven't got smartphones, that, that's just,
you know, that's incredible. And so what's it offering?
So, you know, my, my argument is that is
that social media is a, is a brand new
machine for generating status. It's perfectly possible to have
more status for somebody to have more status on
their phone than they do in real life. You
know, when they, when they fire up their Instagram
or their Twitter or their tiktok or whatever, and
they've got all these followers, people that are, you
know, there are people who are interested in what
they've got to say or what they're doing. Um
So, so that makes it an incredibly valuable resource
for human beings.
Uh And I guess that's an interesting thing about
social media is that you can very easily lie
to show yourself as being a little bit higher
status than you really are, right? Like showing off
just your positive traits and hiding the negative traits
or presenting your, your life as being just about
positive things happening all the time when it's not
really like that.
Yeah, that's right. Perfectionist presentation. I mean, it's a
massive issue, especially on, on sites like Instagram and
it's a big issue for um, young people, especially
on, on Instagram. Um, YOU know, they see these
perfect bodies living these perfect lives and they feel
that they don't measure up. I mean, you know,
we, we human beings look to our social groups
to figure out what's acceptable, what's, what's, what's, what,
what, what's acceptable. And so, you know, we evolved
living side by side and there are more than
50 people. So, so, so, so, so that, so
we've evolved to have this very small live in
this very small social world where um the models
for w what is acceptable to look like weren't
literally models but, but today we're exposed to the
most talented, beautiful, successful, amazing people in the world
on a daily basis. So that, that's, that's not
a great recipe for mental health,
right? So we've been talking mostly about people competing
with other people that are part of the same
group that is in group competition, but there's also
in group out group dynamics. Do social uh do
status games also play a role there? Yeah,
absolutely. So we, we, we, we play status games
within our group. We compete within our group to
be the best member of the group. But status
games play, play status games against other status games,
you know, it's tribe against tribe. So Microsoft versus
Apple Arsenal versus Man United, you know, whatever it
might be. So, so, so, so yeah, it's, it's
so, so, so, you know, we WW we have
this ability to draw status also from within our
group. When we do well within our group, we
serve our group well, either virtuously or with competence,
we feel good. But also when our group wins,
we draw status from the group. You know, we
make that group part of our identity. And you
see that most obviously in sports teams, you know,
you get this crazy thing in sports, I mean,
in the UK, of course, it's all, it's a
football country and you see these people every weekend
going to football and weeping sometimes when their team
loses, got nothing to do with it. It's not
your fault. But, but, but, but, but it's, it's
genuine emotional pain they go through when their team
loses and it's genuine ecstasy when their team, when
their team wins. So you can see that their
group, the group that they identify with is, is,
is part of their identity. It's actually a part
of them and they feel it's losses and they
feel it's wins as if it's happened directly to
them. So, so so and, and that's again, its
manifestation of our unbelievably co-operative nature. As human beings,
you know, we, we are individuals but we all,
but we are also members of groups.
So even uh through your own group, identity, you
can experience higher or lower status. So in the
case of football teams, uh right now, if you
are a fan of Manchester United, you probably feel
lower status than someone who is a fan of
Manchester City. Right?
That's right. That, that, that's exactly it. And that's,
and, and that's, that's the addiction of it. You
know, like, like, you know, if you identify with
a particular football team, then their wins and losses
become your win, wins and losses. So you become
deeply interested in, in their wins and losses and
it becomes, you know, a source of great, um
as I say, great ecstasy, but also great um
pain when, when, when the losses keep coming.
Mhm So we've talked about how there are different
uh status games occurring at the same time in
different societies and how in different contexts they might
play out in different way in different ways. But
uh is it the case that there are parti,
for example, some societies where status games might be
less pronounced, like for example, since we know that
particularly in hunter gatherer societies, they seem to be
at least a little bit more egalitarian than agricultural
societies, industrialized societies. Does, does egalitarianism equate uh less
competition for stables or
not? Yeah. So, so, so wh wh when people
talk about egalitarian hunter gatherer groups. They sometimes imagine
they're this kind of communist utopia. And that's not
the case. The reason that there's not much differential
between the bottom and the top and the hand
together groups, it's partly cos they're just very small
groups. It's partly because they don't own, they tend,
don't, don't tend to own property and, and it
was really when humans settled down and began to,
began to own land and property that these big
status gains began to manifest itself. Uh, BUT it's
mostly because, um, they're all extremely interested in the
state of their own status and, and, and in
hunter gatherer groups, there are always norms, um, to
control other people's grabs for status. You know, pe
we always want to, you know, status is a
resource. It's like food, it's like oxygen, we always
wanna grab it for ourselves. Um, BUT, but it's
also relative, the more you have, the less other
people have, you know. So, so, so everybody is
hotly policing everybody else's overt claims to status and,
and, and, you know, in, in lots of unga
groups, there are, um, uh, often quite, you know,
savage, deadly, um, punishments for the kind of repeated,
um, unfair kind of overt claims to status. I
mean, there's, some of them are quite funny. There
was, I wrote about one of them, you know,
in one Inuit group when, when someone is, you
know, comes in like, you know, the big man.
They, they, they, they stand in a circle around
that person and sing a song of derision in
their face in order to kind of put the
buck in their place. So, so, so, so, so,
so, yeah, that's that, you know, the, the, the,
the egalitarianism, the hunter gatherer is, is not a,
is not an indication that they are that they
don't, they aren't interested in status, that they're all
very interested in status. But it's a, they all
make sure that everybody, nobody gets above their station.
Um Ve very keenly and b they didn't have
property, they didn't have land. There's no way of
manifesting and kind of storing status in the ways
that we have.
So in the book, you go through several different
aspects of human societies that you argue status games
can explain or play a role in like for
example, politics, morality, personal preferences, norms. Let's perhaps, uh
talk about two or three of those. Um Do
status dynamics have any, every, any implications for personality
development and our personal preferences?
Yeah. So, II I think the way it works
is that is that your personality type pushes you
towards, you know, a successful failure in status games.
But also how much you care about status games
and also the kind of status games you're gonna
be playing. So of course, an in an introvert
probably isn't gonna be wanting to, I don't know,
be a dancer or a stripper or something, you
know, like that, that, that, you know, that that's
gonna be, um, manifesting also certain personality types, um,
you know, ll people who are lower in disagree,
who, who are disagreeable, lower in agreeableness. Um, uh,
MORE competitive. Um, SO someone like Steve jobs very
disagreeable man. Yes, everybody will agree. And, and, but
that was part of the reason that he, he,
he, that he tended to win. Um, AND, and
you, and you hear this all the time about,
about people who, who, who, um, um, do very
well in, in kind of corporate status games is
that they, it's not just that they wanna win,
they wanna crush the enemy into the dust, you
know, they're very disagreeable. Uh, BUT also extroverts, extroverts
tend to do better in status games because they
are nice to be around, they're friendly, they're chatty.
Um, PEOPLE wanna be around extroverts so they, they
tend to do better kind of socially in status
games.
Uh, BUT about our personal preferences, what is the
connection there between our sta the status games we
go through and our personal preferences?
Yeah. So, um, II, I think, um, I think
it's true to say that a, lots of, lots
of, of our preferences are genetic, you know, that
there's a heavy genetic component into what our preferences
tend to be. So that's, of course, gonna steer
us into, you know, one status game or another,
especially in, in the west where we have, um,
you know, the system of going to school, going
to university and ho hopefully having uh uh uh
uh uh uh uh an ability to choose the
particular state game of life that we want to
play. So, so, so, so we're much more able
in the West, um, in the wealthy countries to,
um, freely manifest our personalities in the kinds of
status games that we play.
Mhm. And when it comes to norms, that's also
another thing you talk about in the book. At
a certain point, you mentioned uh a survey of
60 preorder societies where they uncovered seven common rules
of play. Like uh for example, help your family,
help your group return favors, be brave, defer to
superiors, divide resources fairly and respect others property. Uh
Where do these norms come from? When what do
they have to do with status games?
Well, these are the kind of DNA basic rules
of human cooper that, that, that, that have um
come into being over millions of years. Um And
they're really the kind of basic building blocks of
how to be AAA human being. Um As I
said, when we came down from the trees and
we started living around campfires, we had to live
in a community. And so these seven rules, tho
those those are the ways that humans have or
human evolution has figured out that we have to
living community. So, so that's where they've come from.
Um And then, of course, as we said before,
the culture sort of sits on top of that
as the kind of software that, that, that's the
hardware, there's seven rules is the hardware and then
there's a software that goes on top that, that,
you know, if one of the rules is defer
to superiors. Ok, how do we figure out who
is a superior? And so there's like, you know,
there's lots of cultural rules that, that go into
that,
right? And, but those are seven of the common
norms that we can find across human societies. But
toward the end of the book, you also talk
about seven rules of the status game. Would you
like to tell us about them?
Yeah, sure. So, I mean, I, I wanted to
kind of end the book with some practical stuff.
Um So, you know, some, some things that I
kind of felt like I'd learned by digging in
so deeply to status. Um And there's a few,
like one of them is um just this idea
that um we should be more free with the
status that we give to other people. Um Status
is this incredible resource, like it's more valuable to
us than gold. Um People die for, for, for,
for their status and yet we, it's free, we
have it to give to people. Um And, and
we're often not very good at um are doing
that being kind of lavish and, and generous with
the with, with, with the praise and the, the
status that we give other people. So II, I
think that's one of those things to, to understand
that we have this gift to give others. Um
And, and the important thing is it's authentic. We,
we, we, we don't want to live in a
kind of horrible Los Angeles kind of type of
society where everybody tells everybody they're awesome and amazing
and then stumps them in the back, you know.
Uh So, so I think that's one of them
is, is, is to, is to, we, we should
be, we should be much more kind of generous
with our um with the status that we're giving
other people. Uh Another one is that um about
reducing our moral sphere. I, I think the easiest
way of earning status is with virtue that y
you know, you see that on social media, earning
status based on competence and success is hard. You've
got to become good at something and you've got
to become better than average really at something to
properly earn status in that I I in that
field, but virtue is easy. Virtue is just like
this is what I believe and if you don't
believe it, you're a scum, you know, that, that,
that's what that is. Um II I it's very
easy to turn into a bully um when you're
um trying to kind of harvest this kind of
virtue based status. And, and, and so much of
social media, the worst parts of social media are
people pushing each other around because they don't follow
their own norms of behavior and what's acceptable. So,
so, so, so i it's this idea of reducing
your moral sphere, you know, like when you're morally
judging, just turn your eyes down to yourself much
more than you're looking at other people because because
the reason you're looking at other people is because
you're playing status games, that that's really what you're
doing. Um So, so, so I think reduc reducing
your moral sphere is a, is another really important
one. I can, what, what I can't remember what
the others were.
Uh I, I think that I have, I have
them here. Another one is make small moments of
prestige.
That's right. Yeah. So, so, and make small moments
of prestige is really about um that kind of
uh Larry David thing that we tend to do,
especially as we get older where we, where we're
constantly moaning and bitching. Um And every time we
do that, it's a, it's a little moment of
dominance. You know, every time we, we theatrically s
at somebody because they're taking too long to pay
with their coins in the shop. Um It's a
moment of dominance. We're kind of, we're becoming that
kind of animalistic self pushing each other around socially.
Um A and it's much more valuable I think
to, to try and make, make these small moments
of prestige where, where you're actually, as I said
before giving status to other uh other people in
a, in a, in a free and generous way.
And that, and that, that makes ourselves feel better.
But it also rebounds on us because we then
get a reputation as being AAA better person and
the person that other people want to be around.
So it's really a massive win, win in making
these small moments of prestige. You've just got to
remember to do it is, it can be difficult
sometimes.
So let's go through some of the other ones
and another one is play a hierarchy of games,
what you got.
So, um I think it's important to hedge your
bets. Um WITH status games, it's dangerous to just
play one game relentlessly all of your life because
then what happens inevitably when things start to go
wrong with that game, you know, um I think
there's some natural hedging when you have Children that,
that something seems to happen when, when, when people
become parents that they start to play status games
through their Children. And as long as that doesn't
get pathological, which it can very easily, you know,
like you, you've, you've become this kind of nightmare
parent who uh who um really, really feels every
win or loss that their child has and, and
becomes too pushy and unpleasant to them. As long
as that doesn't happen, it's actually very healthy because,
you know, you're getting your status from the this
variety of sources. But if you're like me, you
don't have Children, you just basically one thing which
is right. That's really dangerous. Um So, so, so,
so it's about playing a playing, playing lots of
different status games and having lots of different sources
of status. And I mentioned before that I, you
know, was a Samaritan and the reason that I
joined the Samaritans was directly because of this, um
you know, I realized when I was writing the
book that you just, you're just doing one thing
here with your whole life and, and it's not
gonna go on forever and it's just not, and
then what's gonna happen, what's gonna happen is you're
gonna have a nervous breakdown, you know, you're gonna
have a psychological collapse if I, if, if all
this goes wrong, so joining Sam, I would never
have been the kind of person to volunteer before.
So, so joining the Samaritans was, was a very
conscious way of um playing a different kind of
status game and, and thinking, oh, well, you know,
you need to have sort of different sources of
status in your life and different sources of meaning.
Mhm. Uh And do you think that particularly when
it comes to volunteering that perhaps learning more about
these status games that we go through in human
societies and how they can affect people in different
ways may be more empathetic towards people who are
perhaps lower status and that's bec, uh, that's one
of the main reasons why they are suffering.
Yeah. Absolutely. Um, YOU know, one of the things
that I've, that I've brought with me to the
Samarin is this understanding of the importance of status
and, and when I'm talking to people who are
very, very depressed and in despair, um, it's amazing
the effect that, that giving them some compliments has
on them. Like it, like it, like it's almost
like a magic spell. Um And I, and as
I said before, it's important, it's authentic because we're,
we're very good. Humans are very tuned to inauthentic,
you know, spotting in authentic stuff. Um We're very
tuned to bullshit in that way. But, but when
you're listening to them talk and you're, you're thinking
about, ok. Is it, what, what are some things
that I can say that about this person? You
sound very like a caring person. This thing that
you told me about is such a, such an
amazing, courageous thing you did or you're really obviously
a really smart person, like, you know, whatever it
is and it has this kind of magical effect
almost like you, you just, and it's not like
99% of the time. It's like 100% of the
time. WW when you give people a genuine compliment
that, that you really mean. It, it, it has
it. Yeah, it's, I, I, it's incredibly powerful and
it's in those moments, you really, see you, you
really, you really feel the power of status like
it, it's like giving somebody who's starving, um, a
piece of chocolate like it, you just think God,
that is what they need. You know, they, they,
they, they, they're, they're living a life which has
relentlessly told them that they're useless and they have
no value. Um, AND it's also made me realize,
um, uh, y you know, uh, why old people,
they, they, they, they feel that they're a burden.
You hear that word all the time. I'm a
burden, I'm a burden. I'm a burden. I'm a
burden. And it seems to be like this very
common fear of old people and, and, and, and,
and a, and a very common source of anxiety
and depression to older people. And again, I think
that's, that's about status. It's like we, we have
evolved to be um valuable members of, to feel
like valuable members of our groups. And uh and
I think that the, the thing that old people
feel when they're in those terrible states is, is
that they're not, I'm not valuable anymore. And that's
what they're saying when they're saying I'm a burden
like I'm being carried here, I'm not carrying anybody
else. And that the fact that that is a
source of absolute despair to so many people, I
think, I think tells us an awful lot about
the importance of status to the human animal.
Uh And when it comes to younger people. I
would imagine that uh if they're suffering from depression,
it could be because they might have lost at
specific status games. Like, for example, they didn't, they
weren't able to get uh high status job. For
example, they might be earning very little and they
might also feel like they are a burden to,
I don't know their family or people around them
in general.
That's right. I mean, and I think one of
the important things is, is to underline is that,
is that when we talk about status, it's not
that most people want to be super successful. Most
people just wanna be fine, they just want to
be respected, valued. It's not that they want to
be a superstar. Um But, but, but of course
you get um yeah, young people, it's, well, you
know, it, it, it, it's a terrible thing. It's,
it's no, it's no coincidence that when you look
at school shooters in America, they tend to be
unattractive, unpopular, bullied and a bit weird. They, they,
they've been relentlessly made to feel low status and
then they respond by destroying the source of their
humiliation. WW, we are um uh one of the
worst things to be called in our current culture
is an Incel. Um You know, somebody who's in
an involuntary celibate but, but you know, these are
angry, rageful, unpleasant men, but they are also men
suffering an enormous amount of pain because they are
fat, they are ugly, they are unwanted, they are
despised and, and, and that is a horrendous place
for people to be. But because they're men, we
don't have any sympathy for them. Uh, YOU know,
we, we, we, we, we actually, you know, we,
we do everything we can to actually make them
feel worse. And of course they're, they're, you know,
o often, um, their, their rage and despair manifest
as misogyny. So, so, you know, there, there's every
reason to, to be, to, to, to be up,
be upset about that. But, but the core of
it is this absolute despair and this enormous pain
that these people are in.
Mhm When you say that because they are men,
we don't care about them as much. Perhaps you're
referring to the work by Tanya Reynolds where I
ca I can't remember the exact uh terminology there,
but she refers to uh so uh phenomenon, psychological
phenomenon where we tend to be less empathetic toward
men than women.
That's right. That's right. I mean, and it's really,
there, there's also the, what's known as the women
are wonderful effect where um when you survey men
and women, everybody thinks that women are better than
men, including the men. Like, you know, pe people,
you know, I think that the very simplistic idea
of the patriarchy is, is, is very cartoonish and
very shallow. I, I, you know, like, yes, there
are advantages to being men, but there are also
lots of advantages to being women. And one of
the major advantages is that people care about your
pain, they care about your issues. Um They value
your life more. Um So, so, so there are
a whole host of advantages of, of, of um
yy, you know, being female, ever being male. Uh
YOU know, some at an extreme. Um WHEN, when
you hear lots of modern feminists talk about men,
they just sound like the Incels sound when they're
talking about women. But if a man, man does
it, they're called an Incel. But if a woman
does it, they're, they're celebrated as a feminist. So,
you know, that's that kind of weird double standard.
We have, um, um, II I, you know, in
our culture and I, and I think one of
one of them is, is because of this women,
women, a wonderful effect. We just, we, we just
prefer women, men and women tend to prefer women
and care more about what female pain and female
issues.
Well, there are also, of course, there are fewer
in number, but there are also some fem cells.
Uh, THAT is female celibates. So there is also
that phenomenon.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yes, undoubtedly. But, but we don't really hear
about them very much in that, in our, in
our, in our newspapers.
Yeah. That's right. That's right. So let me ask
you about one more rule of the status game
that you suggest to the end of your book,
be different. What does it mean to be different
in this context?
So, being different, I think, I, I, you know,
yeah. So I think it's really important um to
understand that when we're playing competence games, when we're
playing success games, sometimes, um it isn't just about
relentlessly competing to be as good as you can
at the thing that you're trying to be. Sometimes
it's iyy, you, you can win by being different
by trying something creative and different as long as
you're still contributing to the group. And I almost
think that's the definition of genius really, especially if
you think about the creative arts, somebody who tries
to do something a bit different, something like Lars
Von Trier in the film business. Uh AND the
Dog May directors when you try to do something
different and it works like, um that's the, anybody
can do something different. But if you do something
different and it works, um you know, that's, that's
genius. That, that, that's, that, that's, that, that's brilliant.
So, so I think that's a, it's like a
liberating thought really? That, that, that it isn't just
about kind of this remorseless treadmill of getting better
and better and better. It's also why don't you
try to do something a bit different, do something
different to other people and see if you can
make it work that way.
Yeah, maybe you can even create a new form
of status game or a different status game. But
I don't know, perhaps, uh a new sort of
professional activity where you're the pioneer. And so you
immediately are of higher students. Something
that right. And, and I think that's what geniuses
do, isn't it? It's like, you know, when, when,
when I know, I know Steve Jobs didn't invent
the iphone, but when Apple invented the iphone, they
created a new category. So there's a new status
game who can make the best phone and, and,
and that's generative that gives us Google pixels and
Samsung phones and all that other, other sort of
very competitive and in lots of ways better than
the iphone phones. And, you know, in the creative
arts, it's mentioned last Von Trier and their kind
of dogma film method of filmmaking with, you know,
no artificial lights and they had all these rules.
Uh uh AS I say, how we're going to
kind of de Hollywood the film business and that
creates a new status game. You can be the
best dogma filmmaker. Um WW we which was responsible
for some amazing art, you know, 1020 years ago.
So, um so, so yeah, that, that's absolutely right.
I think you're right about that. It's um it's
a sign that you're doing something brilliant if you're,
if you're creating new status games.
So one last question, then, of course, we talked
about how status games can also be about some
prosocial trades. So it's not always about conflict and
competition, but uh there are people that perhaps are
dot Don't like competition too much and they would,
uh like to live in a society perhaps where
we would move beyond status and not care so
much about it. Do, do you think that that
would be possible? And if so w should we
want that or not?
Yeah, I mean, it's not possible. It's just, it
is completely impossible because status games are built into
the, the structure of our brain. You know, there,
there's something called the visual dominance ratio which is
um the um the uh uh uh the, the
ratio by which the higher status person talking will
make eye contact with the lowest status person and,
and you know, ss so there's also something called
the para herbal frequency band where the high status
person will, who speak using one sort of tone
which is inaudible to the conscious ear as it
were and the other person will match. So even
on these very subconscious levels, the way we're talking,
the way we, we doing eye content that we're
not even consciously aware of. We're making status games,
not just that we're playing them, we're making them
happen. You know, you put, you put, you put
three people in a room, let them chat for
15 minutes. They will establish a status game. You
can't help it, you cannot eradicate status from the
human condition is partly what we do. And the
other thing I would say is that why would
you want to? So, so yeah, you know, the,
the, the, the kind of remorseless pursuit of status
can be very damaging, virtue games can be evil.
I mean, we haven't talked about it but in
the book, as you know, I write about status
is um, man, I keep saying manifestation, it's just
really annoying me how status uh emerges in um
uh even in um spree killings in honor killings
in ho in, in um um uh in the
Holocaust uh in the communist horrors of the Soviet
Union. Um So, so, so yeah, it can be
a terrible thing. But ultimately, status is our, I
I is our instinct to want to feel valued
by the human family. So why would you want
to eradicate that status is what is what builds
civilisations. It's what makes us literally better people. It's
what makes us care about other people. And it's
what makes us put the tribe, tribes interests before
our own interests. You know, status is we, we
focus on all the negatives uh which is good
because it helps us fix the negatives. But, but,
but we, we should focus more on the positives
and kind of make status less of a taboo
thing. You know, it's good that we pursue status.
It's good that we wanna compete to be who's
the best uh most virtuous person who can donate
the most money, who can create the best vaccine?
It's good that we compete. So who can uh
yy, you know, build the fastest car, the most
efficient, the hailing taxi ride system. All of those
things that we do um are, are kind of
fueled by this need. We have uh to feel
valued and respected by other people. And that's one
of the best things there is about the human
being.
So when it comes to status games, is there
a final message you would have about them or
perhaps something important that I might have missed in
my questions?
Well, iii, I think, I, I think there's a
paradoxical thing about status, which is, I think you
should take it really seriously because um, it's the
source of meaning in your life outside your Children
and your, you know, your dogs or whatever the
status is, the source of meaning in your life.
It's gonna give you your greatest pictures. It's gonna
give you your life rhythm and purpose and a
direction. But also paradoxically, don't take it too seriously.
Like it, it, it's just a game like it's
just a game that you're playing to, that, that
you're programmed to play in order to make you
feel like you've got to have, you're having this
meaningful life. So there, there are lots of times
in your life when you feel in absolute despair
because something has gone wrong, you feel humiliated, you
feel embarrassed, you've, you've lost in some way. And
I think in those moments, it, it, it, it,
it's worth remembering. It's just a game, it's just
a game. And then round the corner, there will
be another moment where you feel valued and respected
and you get it back again.
Great. So let's send on that message then and
the book is again the status game on human
life and how to play it. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview
and we just before we go, are there any
places on the internet where people can find you
at your work?
Yeah, in um January or February. I'm launching my
substack. It's called You are a story. Um Just
Google it, you are a story. Um So I'm
gonna be writing regularly um about um status about
connection about the human brain as a storyteller, all
of those things um on my substack.
Mhm. Great. So, uh thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a very fun conversation.
Thanks Yara. Thanks for your amazing questions. I've really
enjoyed it. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s Friends, David Sloan
Wilson Yasa, dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and Ye
Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Bela Gil Cortez Solis Scott Zachary
ftw, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki,
Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
di A. Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey junior,
Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas, Radis Mark
Kemple Thomas Dvor. Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von
Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca. Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.